solution for cf rectangles and close #2340 hopefully (#2327)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/cfgym-101102D.mdx

			// for each row in reverse, count # of valid submatrices that start at that cell
			for (int r = row_num - 1; r >= 0; r--) {
				// if we encounter a diff number, just up & reset everything
				if (grid[r][c] != curr) {
					curr = grid[r][c];
					curr_sum = 0;
					rel_streaks = vector<pair<int, int>>();
				}

				/*
				 * the total # of elements that were killed
				 * between this element & the last one
				 */
				int popped = 0;
				// while this current row can possibly be a chokehold
				while (!rel_streaks.empty()
						&& longest_consec[r][c] < rel_streaks.back().first) {
					// subtract the # of rectangles this chokehold made invalid
					curr_sum -= (rel_streaks.back().second + 1)
							* (rel_streaks.back().first - longest_consec[r][c]);
					// add the number of kills this one got & kill this one itself
					popped += rel_streaks.back().second + 1;
					rel_streaks.pop_back();
				}
				rel_streaks.push_back({longest_consec[r][c], popped});
				// add the submatrices of height 1
				curr_sum += longest_consec[r][c];
				total += curr_sum;
			}
		}
		cout << total << '\n';
	}
}
```

</CPPSection>

<JavaSection>

```java
import java.io.*;
import java.util.*;

> public final class Rectangles {

Reviewer: why final

Author: oh if you don't like that i can remove it
```suggestion
public class Rectangles {
```

	public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException {
		BufferedReader read = new BufferedReader(new InputStreamReader(System.in));
		int testNum = Integer.parseInt(read.readLine());
		for (int t = 0; t < testNum; t++) {
			StringTokenizer initial = new StringTokenizer(read.readLine());
			int rowNum = Integer.parseInt(initial.nextToken());
			int colNum = Integer.parseInt(initial.nextToken());
			int[][] grid = new int[rowNum][];
			for (int r = 0; r < rowNum; r++) {

> 				grid[r] = Arrays.stream(read.readLine().split(" ")).mapToInt(Integer::parseInt).toArray();

Reviewer: this line is >> 80 characters long, maybe just add stuff to the array with a string tokenizer and for loop so it's also easier to understand

Author: uh i can break it up, stringtokenizer not really

			}

			int[][] longestConsec = new int[rowNum][colNum];
			for (int r = 0; r < rowNum; r++) {
				int curr = -1;
				int streak = 0;
				for (int c = colNum - 1; c >= 0; c--) {
					if (grid[r][c] == curr) {
						streak++;
					} else {
						curr = grid[r][c];
						streak = 1;
					}
					longestConsec[r][c] = streak;
				}
			}

			long total = 0;
			for (int c = 0; c < colNum; c++) {

> 				ArrayDeque<int[]> relStreaks = new ArrayDeque<>();

Reviewer: Can u use a Stack instead? ArrayDeque is less known

Author: really?

Reviewer: yeah, also you don't need the functionality of an arraydeque here, all the operations you use can be done with a stack, but this is up to u

Author: k cool

---
id: cfgym-101102D
source: CF
title: Rectangles
author: Kevin Sheng
---

Let's first simplify this problem, and then apply the solution of that problem to this one.

Say we had a matrix of all `0`'s and `1`'s. How many submatrices of all `1`'s are there?

> We first define a 2D array, $\texttt{longest\_consec}$, that contains for each cell how many `1`'s there are to the right.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We first define a 2D array, $\texttt{longest\_consec}$, that contains for each cell how many consecutive `1`'s there are to the left.  
```
I'm not sure, but according to the tables as well as the implementation below, shouldn't it be left instead of right?

Also on line 83, it's written as right too.

Author: no it's to the right, the table explains it i think

Reviewer: i'm a bit confused here as well. 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8647920/141039204-69849f92-6d12-43fd-84ba-882862e93d44.png)
why would the top right corner be 2 if there's nothing to the right of it?

Author: oh wait yeah

For example, this matrix:

> <table>
> 	<tr>
> 		<td>1</td>
> 		<td>0</td>
> 		<td>1</td>
> 		<td>1</td>
> 	</tr>
> 	<tr>
> 		<td>0</td>
> 		<td>1</td>
> 		<td>1</td>
> 		<td>1</td>
> 	</tr>
> 	<tr>
> 		<td>0</td>
> 		<td>0</td>
> 		<td>0</td>
> 		<td>1</td>
> 	</tr>
> </table>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<center>
<table>
	<tr>
		<td>1</td>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>1</td>
		<td>1</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>1</td>
		<td>1</td>
		<td>1</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>1</td>
	</tr>
</table>
</center>
```

Would have the following $\texttt{longest\_consec}$:

> <table>
> 	<tr>
> 		<td>1</td>
> 		<td>0</td>
> 		<td>2</td>
> 		<td>1</td>
> 	</tr>
> 	<tr>
> 		<td>0</td>
> 		<td>3</td>
> 		<td>2</td>
> 		<td>1</td>
> 	</tr>
> 	<tr>
> 		<td>0</td>
> 		<td>0</td>
> 		<td>0</td>
> 		<td>1</td>
> 	</tr>
> </table>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<center>
<table>
	<tr>
		<td>1</td>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>2</td>
		<td>1</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>3</td>
		<td>2</td>
		<td>1</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>1</td>
	</tr>
</table>
</center>
```

> Now, we go through each column and then for each row in reverse,
> finding out for each cell the number of submatrices of all `1`'s
> that have said cell as an upper left corner.

Reviewer 2: Optional phrasing stuff :|
```suggestion
Now, we go through each column and then for each row in reverse,
finding out for each cell the number of all `1`'s submatrices where the cell is the upper left corner.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Now, we go through each column and then for each row in reverse,
find out for each cell the number of all `1`'s submatrices where the cell is the upper left corner.
```

> How do we do this?  

Reviewer 4: not necessary

Author: tbh i feel it makes the editorial flow better

Reviewer 4: sure

How do we do this?  
First, let's initialize a stack $\texttt{rel\_streaks}$ and a number $\texttt{curr\_sum}$.  
$\texttt{rel\_streaks}$ will have elements each with two things:
the value of $\texttt{longest\_consec}$ for that element and the difference in row number
(aka distance) between that element and the next element in the stack.  

> $\texttt{curr\_sum}$, after processing, will contain

Reviewer 2: Optional stuff, I'm just being annoying
```
First, let's initialize a stack $\texttt{rel\_streaks}$ which will have elements with two properties: the value of $\texttt{longest\_consec}$ for that element and the difference in row number (aka distance) between that element and the next element in the stack. 

Also initialize a number $\texttt{curr\_sum}$, which after processing, will contain
the number of submatrices of all `1`'s that start at each cell.
```
Seems more intuitive to talk about the stack at the top, and then about curr_sum at the bottom.

Author: yeah that makes sense

Now, let's say we just started at a particular cell. How should we change our value of $\texttt{curr\_sum}$?  
Let's not consider the new matrices of one row that just got added first, and just consider the previous arrays.
To be able to be extended into the current cell, they need to have a column-wise width
less than the current value of $\texttt{longest\_consec}$.  
To subtract these newly invalid submatrices, we keep on popping the stack while the first part of the
first element is larger than the current width and adjusting the value of $\texttt{curr\_sum}$ as needed.

Finally, for each step, we just need to add the current element on to the stack and add to $\texttt{curr\_sum}$
the value of $\texttt{longest\_consec}$ for that cell.

Given that we figured out that simpler problem, we can apply this to the actual problem.
Let's make a modified version of $\texttt{longest\_consec}$, where each cell contains the
number of consecutive elements to the right with the same value as the current cell.  

After that, we run almost the exact same algorithm, only now resetting all the necessary
variables when we encounter a number different than the previous ones we were processing.

> **Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(TRC)$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(T \cdot R \cdot C)$
```
I think?

Author: uh i'll have someone else way on this

Reviewer 4: either way works

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp

#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
#include <algorithm>

using std::cout;
using std::endl;
using std::vector;
using std::pair;

int main() {
	// the code TLEs without this
	std::ios_base::sync_with_stdio(false);
	std::cin.tie(NULL);

	int test_num;
	std::cin >> test_num;
	for (int t = 0; t < test_num; t++) {
		int row_num;
		int col_num;
		std::cin >> row_num >> col_num;
		vector<vector<int>> grid(row_num, vector<int>(col_num));
		for (int r = 0; r < row_num; r++) {
			for (int c = 0; c < col_num; c++) {
				std::cin >> grid[r][c];
			}
		}

		vector<vector<int>> longest_consec(row_num, vector<int>(col_num));
		for (int r = 0; r < row_num; r++) {
			int curr = -1;
			int streak = 0;
			for (int c = 0; c < col_num; c++) {
				if (grid[r][c] == curr) {
					streak++;
				} else {
					curr = grid[r][c];
					streak = 1;
				}
				longest_consec[r][c] = streak;
			}
		}

		long long total = 0;
		for (int c = 0; c < col_num; c++) {
			vector<pair<int, int>> rel_streaks;
			int curr_sum = 0;  // the current amt of valid submatrices
			int curr = grid[row_num - 1][c];

> 			// for each row in reverse, count # of valid submatrices that start at that cell

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
			// for each row in reverse, count # 
			// of valid submatrices that start at that cell
```
over 80 char

Author: just a little (right?)

					// subtract the # of rectangles this chokehold made invalid
					curr_sum -= (rel_streaks.back().second + 1)
							* (rel_streaks.back().first - longest_consec[r][c]);
					// add the number of kills this one got & kill this one itself
					popped += rel_streaks.back().second + 1;
					rel_streaks.pop_back();
				}
				rel_streaks.push_back({longest_consec[r][c], popped});
				// add the submatrices of height 1
				curr_sum += longest_consec[r][c];
				total += curr_sum;
			}
		}
		cout << total << '\n';
	}
}
```

</CPPSection>

<JavaSection>

```java
import java.io.*;
import java.util.*;

public class Rectangles {
	public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException {
		BufferedReader read = new BufferedReader(new InputStreamReader(System.in));
		int testNum = Integer.parseInt(read.readLine());
		for (int t = 0; t < testNum; t++) {
			StringTokenizer initial = new StringTokenizer(read.readLine());
			int rowNum = Integer.parseInt(initial.nextToken());
			int colNum = Integer.parseInt(initial.nextToken());
			int[][] grid = new int[rowNum][];
			for (int r = 0; r < rowNum; r++) {
				grid[r] = Arrays.stream(read.readLine().split(" "))

> 						.mapToInt(Integer::parseInt).toArray();

Reviewer 3: the guide is displaying this as one line for some reason so over 80 char????

Author: this is two lines?

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/55369003/141369987-5c84bcb5-4db9-4dde-ba52-e9bf94b4c070.png)
idk chief looks fine to me

---
id: cfgym-101102D
source: CF
title: Rectangles
author: Kevin Sheng
---

> Let's first simplify this problem, and then apply the solution of that problem to this one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's first simplify this problem, and then generalize the solution of that problem to this one.
```

Say we had a matrix of all `0`'s and `1`'s. How many submatrices of all `1`'s are there?

> We first define a 2D array, $\texttt{longest\_consec}$, that contains for each cell how many `1`'s there are to the right.  

Reviewer: feel free to edit and reword if u think something should change
```suggestion
Let's first define a 2D array, $\texttt{longest\_consec}$, that contains the number of consecutive `1`'s that are directly to the right for each cell (including the cell itself).  
```

> For example, this matrix:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For example, this matrix...
```

<center>
<table>
	<tr>
		<td>1</td>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>1</td>
		<td>1</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>1</td>
		<td>1</td>
		<td>1</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>1</td>
	</tr>
</table>
</center>

> Would have the following $\texttt{longest\_consec}$:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
would have the following $\texttt{longest\_consec}$:
```
No need for capitalization because it's a continuation of the previous sentence

<center>
<table>
	<tr>
		<td>1</td>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>2</td>
		<td>1</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>3</td>
		<td>2</td>
		<td>1</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>0</td>
		<td>1</td>
	</tr>
</table>
</center>

Now, we go through each column and then for each row in reverse,

> find out for each cell the number of all `1`'s submatrices where the cell is the upper left corner.

Reviewer: this is worded a bit awkwardly

Author: lol it's the best i could do

Reviewer: why does going through each column and then for each row in reverse mean

Author: so you iterate through each column
then for each column you go through each row in that column in reverse
the code explains it better tbh

> How do we do this?  

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
How would we do this?

```

First, let's initialize a stack $\texttt{rel\_streaks}$ which will have elements with two properties:
the value of $\texttt{longest\_consec}$ for that element and the difference in row number
(aka distance) between that element and the next element in the stack. 

> Also initialize a number $\texttt{curr\_sum}$, which after processing, will contain
> the number of submatrices of all `1`'s that start at each cell.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also initialize a number $\texttt{curr\_sum}$, which, after processing, will contain
the number of submatrices of all `1`'s that start at each cell.
```

Now, let's say we just started at a particular cell. How should we change our value of $\texttt{curr\_sum}$?  
Let's not consider the new matrices of one row that just got added first, and just consider the previous arrays.
To be able to be extended into the current cell, they need to have a column-wise width
less than the current value of $\texttt{longest\_consec}$.  
To subtract these newly invalid submatrices, we keep on popping the stack while the first part of the
first element is larger than the current width and adjusting the value of $\texttt{curr\_sum}$ as needed.

Finally, for each step, we just need to add the current element on to the stack and add to $\texttt{curr\_sum}$
the value of $\texttt{longest\_consec}$ for that cell.

Given that we figured out that simpler problem, we can apply this to the actual problem.
Let's make a modified version of $\texttt{longest\_consec}$, where each cell contains the
number of consecutive elements to the right with the same value as the current cell.  

After that, we run almost the exact same algorithm, only now resetting all the necessary
variables when we encounter a number different than the previous ones we were processing.

> **Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(TRC)$

Reviewer 5: I don't think $T$ is conventionally factored into the time complexity
```suggestion
**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(RC)$ for each of $T$ test cases
```

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp

#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
#include <algorithm>

using std::cout;
using std::endl;
using std::vector;
using std::pair;

int main() {

> 	// the code TLEs without this

Reviewer 5: Link fastio module

Author: uh why

Reviewer 5: reasons

Author: bruh

Reviewer 4: just put `// see /general/fast-io` instead of `// the code TLEs without this`. the c++ short template (from usaco guide) does this too

	std::ios_base::sync_with_stdio(false);

> 	std::cin.tie(NULL);

Author: dustin here's the thing
when you copy paste the code you usually just want the code to _output_ some extra stuff
"hey what's the value of [x] here"
you almost never add another cin, but you're almost certainly going to add a cout
that's the same reason i kept using std::endl for

> 	std::cin.tie(NULL);

Reviewer 5: wait
this seems suspiciously like a template
and you know that templates are absolutely forbidden in usaco guide

> 	std::cin.tie(NULL);

Author: this is a joke right

> 	std::cin.tie(NULL);

Reviewer 5: not my words 🤷

> 	std::cin.tie(NULL);

Author: some #include's dont' count as a template

> 	std::cin.tie(NULL);

Author: then whose are they

> 	std::cin.tie(NULL);

Reviewer 5: yours

> 	std::cin.tie(NULL);

Reviewer 5: > some #include's dont' count as a template

are you sure about that

> 	std::cin.tie(NULL);

Author: > yours

give me a link to my comment

> 	std::cin.tie(NULL);

Reviewer 4: > I know this is your thing, but you use `cin` three times but don't put `using namespace std::cin` yet you only use `cout` once and include it.

don't really matter as it doesn't hurt code readability

			int curr_sum = 0;  // the current amt of valid submatrices
			int curr = grid[row_num - 1][c];
			// for each row in reverse, count # of valid submatrices that start at that cell
			for (int r = row_num - 1; r >= 0; r--) {
				// if we encounter a diff number, just up & reset everything
				if (grid[r][c] != curr) {
					curr = grid[r][c];
					curr_sum = 0;
					rel_streaks = vector<pair<int, int>>();
				}

				/*
				 * the total # of elements that were killed
				 * between this element & the last one
				 */
				int popped = 0;
				// while this current row can possibly be a chokehold
				while (!rel_streaks.empty()
						&& longest_consec[r][c] < rel_streaks.back().first) {
					// subtract the # of rectangles this chokehold made invalid
					curr_sum -= (rel_streaks.back().second + 1)
							* (rel_streaks.back().first - longest_consec[r][c]);
					// add the number of kills this one got & kill this one itself
					popped += rel_streaks.back().second + 1;
					rel_streaks.pop_back();
				}
				rel_streaks.push_back({longest_consec[r][c], popped});
				// add the submatrices of height 1
				curr_sum += longest_consec[r][c];
				total += curr_sum;
			}
		}

> 		cout << total << '\n';

Reviewer 5: If you don't even use `endl`, then why bother including the namespace?

Author: addressed in my other comment

}
```

> </CPPSection>

Author: oh thanks
